Hysteria caused by trolls, online vigilantism and bad cybersleuthing was already on the rise online, and with the fake news industry reaching its peak thanks to Google's enormous AdSense network, it’s only a matter of time before someone is killed by it.

This Sunday came uncomfortably close, when 28-year-old North Carolina resident Edgar M. Welch traveled to the popular DC pizzeria Comet Ping Pong with a handgun and an assault rifle to “self-investigate” the validity of the 4chan conspiracy meme and fake news story known as “Pizzagate.”

Welch was so convinced by what he read online, according to the criminal complaint filed on Monday, that he pointed his gun at one employee and fired multiple rounds into Comet Ping Pong’s walls, a computer desk and a door. Welch surrendered to police peacefully after failing to find any evidence of the abused children he believed were trapped in the pizzeria’s secret passages. No one was injured, and Welch’s hearing is tomorrow, Thursday at 9am.

Sunday’s incident was the most violent to befall Comet Ping Pong since 4chan began posting about the pizzeria last month. Prior to Sunday’s incident, the owner and staff told the New York Times they’d received hundreds of death threats via text message and social media. In addition, parents who had liked the Comet Ping Pong Facebook page had pictures of their children taken from their accounts and circulated by Pizzagaters as evidence of Clinton’s child trafficking ring.

For those unfamiliar, Pizzagate originally started on a 4chan troll thread in early November and claims the Clinton’s are running a child exploitation ring out of Comet Ping Pong. The conspiracy meme relies heavily on Wikileaks-leaked Clinton campaign chief John Podesta’s emails about lunch options. That the primary evidence in Pizzagate is emails about pizza, and not missing children or police reports, should signal to most people the level of insincerity behind the meme, but right-wing and fake news sites saw a winner and latched onto the story. Alex Jones on InfoWars and pro-Trump fake news sites were already spreading a similar narrative sans the pizzeria.

As infosec and Twitter personality @SwiftOnSecurity tells it in a tweet on October 30th: "Started off as a 4chan joke, InfoWars nuts thought it was serious, trolls keep up fascade, people think they're serious, big cycle."

Big cycle, indeed.

4chan trolls, enthusiastic Trump supporters and Clinton-haters were quickly joined by concerned parents new to the internet as well as some in the OpDeathEaters movement, an Anonymous op dedicated to uncovering and stopping child sex abuse rings in England. (It should be noted the most influential leadership in OpDeathEaters, like Heather Marsh, did not participate in Pizzagate conspiracy-mongering.) From there, the conspiracy meme circulated heavily on Facebook, reddit, voat and Twitter throughout the month of November both jokingly and with sincere outrage.  

This is how some of 4chan’s largest ops start: always in a joking or chaos-oriented manner only to pull in real participants when they hit on a kernel of truth or plunk on an appropriate heart string. This happened with Chanology and joke-protesting Scientology in 2008, 4chan’s first major meat space operation that attracted actual Scientology protestors and critics and spawned the Anonymous we all know today.

It happened again in 2014 with indie game designer Zoe Quinn, when her ex-boyfriend instigated mob harassment in 4chan IRC chat rooms as some sort of vendetta op, that ultimately morphed into GamerGate.

Besides these kinds of accidental social movements, 4chan is consistently trying to deceive the media and the public with fake stories. #Cut4Bieber and #Cut4Zayn are two targeted at teenage girls in prior years, while Operation Lollipop was a year-long con involving 4channers masquerading as Black and Asian feminists in an attempt to discredit them.

Pizzagate is a continuation of this pattern, both of fooling well-meaning people and the media and of ideas being lifted off 4chan and amplified without context or explanation. Sexually abusing a child is the worst evil no sane person can defend and is the kind of crime men will take up arms to fight against, literally.  

Unlike OpDeathEaters, however, which works primarily off actual victim testimony, police reports, child psychologists and implicated clergymen and politicians in convicted cases, Pizzagate is most concerned with emails sent to and from Democratic party staff mentioning food items like pizza, pasta, hot dogs, burgers and ice cream and a dinner with performance artist Marina Abramovic. This focus is thanks to 4chan. The Abramovic link was further spread by both Alex Jones and Wikileaks, who appear convinced Abramovic is practicing witchcraft with the Clintons because she once emailed Podesta about dinner and referenced her 1997 work “Spirit Cooking” when asking about an art collector.

Pizzagate also likes bringing up Bill Clinton’s connections to convicted sex offender and pedophile billionaire Jeffrey Epstein -- but stays silent on the actual paper trail that also connects him to Donald Trump. Trump denies knowing Epstein now, but in 2002 he told New York Magazine he’d “known Jeff for 15 years” and called him a “terrific guy” that “likes beautiful women as much as I do, and many of them are on the younger side." In 2009 Trump was served with a subpoena for a deposition testifying against Epstein and appeared, along with various family members and staff, in Epstein’s infamous “little black book.” Despite a child rape lawsuit filed this year against both Epstein and Trump, that was dropped right before the election, there is no hysteria over Trump molesting children among the Pizzagate or 4chan crowd. This is purely an anti-Hillary op. If these people were genuine about protecting children, they would be targeting Trump as well.

This isn’t the first time this year a kind of internet hysteria was induced by bad cybersleuthing using shoddy evidence. Just this summer, fans of 19-year-old British YouTuber Marina Joyce became convinced she’d been kidnapped by ISIS and was being forced at gunpoint to make awkward style and beauty videos. Her fans poured over hours of video and genuinely believed she was blinking SOS and whispering “help me.” An associated hashtag trended globally and local police investigated. Joyce was never kidnapped, and that one whisper heard was Joyce’s mother whispering to her daughter to stand up straight “like me” while she was filming her in their garden.

The Marina Joyce conspiracy theories were unusual in that they started on Tumblr and YouTube among young women and not reddit nor 4chan by men, showing this kind of cybersteria is not confined to platforms that are predominantly male.   

The first instance of this male-championed cybersteria is, of course, reddit’s 2013 crowd-sourced investigation for the Boston Marathon bomber. A few wrong suspects were named, their family’s harassed with the entire incident dubbed a “racist Where’s Wally.” Reddit site policy was changed as a result.  

Psychologists are in agreement the human brain is hardwired to recognize patterns in large amounts of data as a survival mechanism, but in the modern age that pattern recognition brain power idly spits out conspiracies about beauty vloggers and pizzerias. Following a year of Trump slogans like “Lock Her Up” targeted at Hillary Clinton, only for Trump to change his mind and doing nothing to dissipate the emotional contagion train he started, conspiracies about Mrs. Clinton committing horrific crimes were inevitable. Brains trying to cope with such divisive campaign rhetoric went looking for, and created, imaginary horrendous crimes… like Pizzagate.

Google and Facebook have vowed to crack down on fake news sites, but it is unclear what that entails and where the line is drawn. At time of publication, Before It’s News was still connected to Google Adsense while InfoWars was running a story claiming the government was trying to shut down the site.

Government and corporate interference doesn’t address the emotional contagion or vigilante element. Both reddit and 4chan have banned witch-hunting on their sites but that hasn’t stopped vigilantism from occurring on those platforms.