UPDATE: Kanye West has been discharged from UCLA Medical Center and is at home under the care of his wife Kim Kardashian and his personal physician, Dr. Michael Farzam, according to TMZ. The rapper was hospitalized 10 days ago.
Hours after Kanye West canceled the remainder of his Saint Pablo tour, the rapper was placed under observation for exhaustion at a Los Angeles hospital Monday, his rep told the New York Times.

NBC Los Angeles reports that police responded to a "medical welfare" call involving the rapper at 1:20 p.m. local time. Although no criminal activity had been committed, paramedics at the scene made the decision to hospitalize West was made for "his own health and safety." According to the Times, the rapper's doctor had called the LAPD.
A representative for West did not immediately reply to Rolling Stone's request for comment.
While the Los Angeles Fire Department, citing HIPA laws, could not confirm whether West was involved, a spokesperson for the LAFD told Rolling Stone, "At 1:20 p.m. today, the Los Angeles Fire Department responded to an unspecified medical aid request in the 900-block of North Laurel Avenue. An adult male described as medically stable was taken to an area hospital for further assessment."
West's recent Saint Pablo shows had recently been marred by bizarre rants from the rapper, including his controversial statements onstage about how he "would have voted for Donald Trump" in the presidential election.
The canceled tour comes after West abruptly ended a Sacramento concert after a 30-minute rant. Four songs into the show, West launched into a tirade that called out Jay Z and Beyoncé, radio programmers, Hillary Clinton, Google and Mark Zuckerberg before cutting the concert short.
West was scheduled to perform Sunday night at Los Angeles' Forum – itself a makeup show after vocal problems forced the rapper to cut a previous Forum gig short – but that concert was canceled at the last minute Sunday. West flooded his Instagram with exactly 99 caption-less photos of Margiela fashion spreads after the concert was canceled.