Kanye West was hospitalized for stress and exhaustion Monday at the Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center in Los Angeles following several chaotic days on tour, according to news reports.

And the remainder of the rapper’s North American tour dates have been canceled, following a Sacramento show brought to a halt when West delivered a stream-of-consciousness speech before storming offstage.

A representative for West, who spoke to the New York Times on the condition of anonymity, said West’s doctor called 911 on Monday afternoon, and West agreed to go to the hospital for evaluation.

The 39-year-old Grammy-winning musician spent the night at the hospital for his own health and safety, according to the Associated Press.

His mother-in-law, Kris Jenner, told Vanity Fair on Monday that West was “exhausted” but “good.”

West’s hospitalization followed a bizarre several days on tour.

At a concert Thursday in San Jose, West announced that had he voted in the 2016 presidential election, he would have cast his vote for President-elect Donald Trump — a pronouncement that surprised his fan base.

“I told y’all I didn’t vote, right?” West said to his screaming fans. “But if I would have voted, I would have voted on Trump.”

Then, on Saturday in Sacramento, West went on a meandering tirade, criticizing his fellow musicians and comparing himself to Trump.

“I am putting my career, my life, my public well-standing at risk when I talk to y’all like this,” West told a confused crowd, according to the Times. “I’ve been sitting here to give y’all my truth even at the risk of my own life. Even at the risk of my own success, my own career. I’ve been sitting here to give y’all the truth.”

West is known for such rants at his shows, but they have taken a surprising turn.

The recent behavior led some to speculate as to the state of West’s mental health, but a source who spoke to People magazine attributed his hospitalization simply to his exhaustion.

“It’s nothing like that,” the source, who was not named, told People. “He’s just exhausted. He’s been working around the clock on fashion design, both on his own line and the Adidas line. He’s a notorious workaholic, so balancing both that work — which is extremely important to him — and the rigors of the tour every night, it really wore him out.”

Los Angeles police responded about 1:20 p.m. Monday to a call about a disturbance in West Hollywood, according to the Associated Press. The New York Times reported that the situation became a “medical emergency.”

No criminal activity was involved; however, West was transported to the hospital, where he was put on a psychiatric hold, according to the AP.

Although many of the details are still unknown, the unnamed source told People, “He is exhausted and currently dealing with sleep deprivation. He went to the hospital at will under the advice of his physician. He’s fine.”

TMZ had reported that West was restrained when he was brought to the hospital, but the person who talked to People claimed that was not the case. “He went freely,” the person said.

Kim Kardashian-West, his wife, was scheduled to attend the Angel Ball in New York City on Monday night, which would have marked her first public appearance since she was robbed in her hotel room in Paris last month. But she did not attend.

West is generally an active presence on Twitter, but he has not tweeted in weeks.

His last tweet was a birthday message for his wife.