Not only did the attack usher in the shattering realization that Germany, too, was now among the front ranks of European countries, alongside France and Belgium, that have suffered large-scale attacks in recent years.

The Islamic State released a statement on Tuesday through its Amaq news agency describing the driver of the truck as “a soldier” who had answered the call to wage attacks against countries fighting the group, which is also known as ISIS, ISIL or Daesh. But it offered no other details about the driver’s identity or whether he had directly interacted with the group or was just sympathetic to it.

The attack in Berlin, which killed 12 people and wounded many others, immediately heightened the sense of political vulnerability around Ms. Merkel, a linchpin of European unity. And it came at a precarious time of concern about Russian meddling and a populist backlash over her decision to open German borders to nearly a million migrants and refugees in 2015.

Her political opposition issued a surprisingly speedy and stinging reproach, even in the midst of the grieving over the 12 killed and dozens wounded on Monday when a driver plowed the truck through Christmas stalls selling holiday gifts, crafts and snacks, and then fled.

The Berlin victims were labeled “Merkel’s dead” by Marcus Pretzell, leader of the Alternative for Germany party in the country’s most populous state, North Rhine-Westphalia. Frauke Petry, the party leader, said bluntly, “Germany is no longer safe.”

Daniela Schwarzer, leader of the German Council on Foreign Relations, said that the statements offered a taste of the bitter debate to come in 2017.

“They were very quick to link this directly to Merkel, and they said horrific things, blaming her for the deaths,” Ms. Schwarzer said.

“That gives us a sense of what is coming in the electoral campaign,” she said, adding that after an especially nasty presidential campaign in the United States, German politicians, too, may abandon traditional decorum.

Early in the day, a somber Ms. Merkel, dressed in black, acknowledged what people across Europe had been fearing with the approach of the holiday season: One of the Continent’s ubiquitous Christmas markets appeared to have been targeted for assault.

“We must assume at the current time that it was a terrorist attack,” Ms. Merkel told reporters on Tuesday.

She later appeared in a black wool coat, bearing a white rose to lay at a memorial outside of a church in the heart of western Berlin, near the scene of the attack.

Even as she was mourning, Peter Frank, the country’s federal prosecutor, insisted that while the similarities to last summer’s Bastille Day attack in Nice, France, led his office to suspect that the Berlin attack was motivated by terrorism, he was unable to produce any hard evidence.

“We are investigating in all directions,” Mr. Frank said, explaining that he decided to start an investigation given the symbolism of the target and the timing, less than a week before Christmas Eve.

Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany on Tuesday at the site of the Christmas market attack in Berlin. Credit Hannibal Hanschke/Reuters
“We have not limited ourselves to one suspect or one possible perpetrator,” he added, “But we can’t make a final assessment whether it is a terrorism-motivated attack, or whether it was a copycat act.”

In a country where a painful experience with fascism has placed personal privacy at a premium, the investigation was sure to be complicated by the absence of surveillance cameras that have become the norm in cities like London.

Instead, officials appealed to witnesses and the public to provide tips or video of the crime scene and any suspects, and to avoid posting them on social media outlets.

German officials are normally tight-lipped about high-profile investigations, preferring to withhold any information until they have clear answers.

The readiness to go public at such an early stage of the investigation reflects the sensitivity of the issue and the political problems Ms. Merkel already faces over her government’s policy of admitting refugees by the hundreds of thousands.

That policy, though welcomed at the time, has come under mounting criticism over the last year, as Germany has been targeted by a series of smaller, less deadly, but unnerving incidents involving foreigners.

“I know that it would be particularly difficult for all of us to bear if it is confirmed that this deed was carried out by a person who sought protection and asylum in Germany,” Ms. Merkel told reporters Tuesday. She vowed to punish those behind the crimes “as severely as our laws demand.”

What authorities can say for certain is that a tractor-trailer with Polish license plates and laden with steel rods jumped a sidewalk around 8 p.m. Monday and plowed into the market near the Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church, a symbolic Berlin site whose spire, jagged from bomb damage, was intentionally left unrepaired after World War II.

A man believed to be the driver fled after the attack and another man, identified as a Pole, was found dead with gunshot and stab wounds in the passenger seat, police said.

Less than an hour later, a man who Berlin police said was seen fleeing the scene was arrested nearby on suspicion of involvement. He was the Pakistani man later freed.

Although several hearings were scheduled in his asylum case, the man did not show up for several of them and his application was still pending.

Officials in Berlin have been straining to deal with a flood of asylum applications. Although the number of arrivals has slowed recently from a high point in the summer of 2015, tens of thousands remain in communal housing, awaiting processing of their applications.

In addition to the 12 dead, 48 people were wounded at the Berlin market, 18 of them critically, said Thomas de Maizière, Germany’s interior minister.

The president of the federal criminal police, Holger Münch, said investigators were collecting evidence and using forensics to try to determine whether the suspect in detention had been driving the truck.

Security officials have been warning that Germany remains in the sights of terrorists, without naming any specific threats. Coming as many families were winding down their work for the year and readying holiday festivities, the attack left the country in subdued shock. Other Christmas markets in the city were closed on Tuesday, and flags were lowered to half-staff.

“Twelve people were among us yesterday and were happy about Christmas and the holidays,” Ms. Merkel said. “This is incomprehensible, this act that robbed them of their lives.”

She urged people not to bow to fear and suspicion, telling Germans they must continue to uphold their traditions, even when faced with the reality that democracy is vulnerable. “We don’t want to do without Christmas markets, without nice outings together,” she said. “We do not wish to let fear and angst take away our freedom to live.”

Mr. de Maizière said there would be increased security in public places and at key transit hubs, and that local officials would make decisions about events that might need to be curtailed for safety reasons.

Officials have been aware for some time of the risk of attacks on holiday-themed events in Europe. The State Department issued a travel alert on Nov. 21 recommending that Americans “exercise caution at holiday festivals, events and outdoor markets” throughout the Continent.

“Credible information” indicated that the Islamic State, its affiliates and sympathizers “continue to plan terrorist attacks in Europe, with a focus on the upcoming holiday season and associated events,” the alert said, and that an attack could come with little or no warning.

Germany’s populists seized on the attack to drub the chancellor for her immigration policy. Frauke Petry of the Alternative for Germany party said in a statement early Tuesday that “Germany was no longer safe” and told citizens that it would be Ms. Merkel’s “duty to tell you that.”

Noting the successive terrorist attacks in France, including the Nice attack in July, Ms. Petry called the carnage at the Berlin market “not just an attack on our freedom and our way of life, but also on our Christian tradition.”

Ariel Zurawski, the head of the Polish company that owned the truck, said the dead man was his cousin Lukasz, who was 37 and married with a child.

He said that Lukasz had been driving a shipment of construction materials to Berlin from Italy and that he had identified Lukas from police photographs of the dead man. German officials declined to give further information on the victim.

The side of the market where the truck slammed into the crowd remained cordoned off early Tuesday.

Police officers patrolled the area, as Berlin residents bearing flowers and candles placed them at makeshift memorials on either side of the church.

Oliver Horn said he had written the slogan “Même pas peur” (French for “Not even afraid”) from the aftermath of the Nice attacks, on a poster and hung it near the site on his way to work on Tuesday.

“It just came to my mind,” he said of the gesture. “I felt I had to do something.”

The sign caught the attention of Cyril Leteuil, who was visiting Berlin from Bordeaux. “It’s just like Nice,” he said. “We’ve seen this in France.”